# Mathematics Enrichment

This curriculum covers in detail Logic, Probability, Geometry, Sequences, and
Number Theory. Most of it was developed for the Grand River Chinese School
interest course in mathematics, at the Grade 4 level, but some of the content is
appropriate for a more advanced audience.

## Subjects

### Diagnostic

This folder contains more advanced material, perhaps so advanced that it is not
normally taught to fourth graders. This material may be suitable for a more
advanced audience.

#### Digit sums

This subject covers an interesting subject that comes up often when looking at
whole numbers in base 10: the sum of the digits. Currently contains two lessons,
both interactive notebooks, but both incomplete.

#### Operations

This subject is planned to be a gentle introduction to analysis, covering basic
concepts such as rational exponents at a non-rigorous level but also introducing
some rigorous concepts. It currently contains only one worksheet (with answers)
on numbers and operations. It is aimed at about the Grade 6 level.

#### Proof

This subject is planned to introduce techniques for mathematical proof, and is
aimed at the high school level. It currently contains only one worksheet on
proof by cases.

### Functions

This subject is not yet started. It covers functions: what they are, what they
do, and how to use them.

### Games

This subject currently contains a single fun homework sheet on verbal
arithmetic.

### Geometry

This subject covers angles, polygons, and area. However, many of the documents
are Word documents and have not yet been translated into LaTeX, so this unit is
not yet available.

### Introduction

This subject contains a single lesson introducing the entire curriculum. No
expansion is planned.

### Logic & Probability

This subject covers logic and probability. It is quite short and incomplete.

### Measurement

This subject is planned but not yet started. Stay tuned!

### Number Theory

This subject covers divisibility and primes. It is complete, but some
significant expansion is planned, so that it will also cover remainders and
factorization.

### Sequences

This subject covers arithmetic, geometric, and Fibonacci sequences. It is
mostly complete but somewhat rough on the edges.

### Skills

This subject will include more skills in the future, but expansion is not
currently a major priority.

### Supplemental

This subject will include more skills in the future, but expansion is not
currently a major priority.
